You said my wife is from Worcester.
For the local readers, perhaps.
She lived across the street from Clark University.
I can't remember the area.
Hey, Peter.
How are you, pal?
Great.
What are your plans, my friend?
Well, I'm here.
See how we do for the weekend.
I'm doing a little—this is Peter Lyons, this gentleman then.
He's from the Worcester Telegram.
Hi, Nick.
Nice to meet you.
You can take a look at that.
Step outside while we talk here.
You're going to pick me up and drive me down the cave, huh?
Yeah.
That's all I want to know.
What time?
Well, we're going on the Peter Meade show.
For half an hour of your time at most.
I just thought it would be nice for the local readers if you did mention that your wife is from Worcester, but you went to school with her, I read in the book.
Yeah, we went to high school together.
Her father was a Worcester fellow, all of her grandmother and grandfather, and they came from Worcester.
As a matter of fact, after we had married, I remember visiting.
You don't have three hours, just so you know.
No way.
We're going to be out of there by seven o'clock.
That's exactly right.
All right.
And Millie's name was Miller.
And yeah, she lived a really life in Worcester.
Can you tell me your dad's name?
Because I'll look it up, and it'll be nice.
Her father was Harlow Miller, and her grandfather, her grandfather actually, I guess, was a Methodist minister out, and what's the next town outside there?
Grafton, Shrewsbury.
The other way.
Holden, Milbury, Sutton, Stowe, Spencer.
Spencer, that's where it was, Spencer.
And her father was born in Spencer, and they moved to Worcester.
Good local angle.
Oh yeah, the old Worcester town.
But I'm very friendly with them.
The Yatags up there, and Joe Colleen was my pal.
There's so many people down the Cape that I'm friendly with now.
There's a good Worcester crowd down there.
Big Worcester.
I'm from Lowell originally myself, but just a lot of Greeks up there, which explains my background.
I love this book, sir.
I'm the book editor of the newspaper.
You enjoyed it.
You know something?
We autographed yesterday at the Harvard Coupe 825 books, and we had to cut it off.
We didn't have them anymore.
Today we were 775 at the Laureate Bookshop, and they said, we've never had anything like this.
The biggest anybody ever did was Bob Hope with 407.
Wow.
And they said, we shut the line off and he said, the line was as long as when we started.
I can't believe it.
The job I used to have trying to get people to propose to vote.
It's uncommonly good.
I mean, my job is book editor.
I read books professionally.
It's my job.
Well, you know, I sat down for two hours with
Well, let me give you the background.
One day, about eight, seven or eight years ago now, a young fellow came in to see me.
His name was Bill Novak.
And he says, I'm a writer from, I live in Newton.
And he said, I'm a Canadian, but I've been living down here for years.
He says, I've seen you at the Red Sox game.
I'm a great Red Sox fan.
I'm a great Patriots fan.
I'm a great Celtics buff.
And I said, I've met you everywhere along the line.
He said, I'd like to write your life story.
I've been following you in politics since I was a kid.
I said, I don't think there's any story out there, Bill.
I said, by the way, what are you doing?
He said, I just signed on to write an Iacocca book.
I said, after you get through with the Iacocca book, come back and send it.
Well, in the meantime, my son Kip said to me, Dad, a lot of people are saying you ought to put your memoirs down.
You go, people, you get great recall.
There isn't anybody that you can't tell a story about.
You can remember things.
And he said, people think you ought to get your recollections done on paper.
And I said, well, I don't know.
I told him.
I had this young kid who wrote the Ayacocca book.
Well, he said, we're going to do it.
If you're going to do it, he said, you have to get an agent.
And he said, the object of getting an agent is that they have to go out and find out if anybody is interested in writing your life.
So he said, and they also have to get an author.
Well, anyway, I talked with Jay, and we signed him up as our agent.
And Jay said to me, well, now what I do now is I put an ad in the paper, trade paper, looking for a writer.
400 applied to write my story.
I haven't applied.
Did you really?
I would have.
Oh, 400, he said, applied.
But he said, we've weeded it down to the last ten.
And I looked at him, didn't know any, but I recognized Bill Novak's name.
I said, I like the kid the minute he came to my office, I said, that's the kid we ought to talk to.
He seems to have captured your voice.
This is your voice in here.
Well, let me tell you the interesting story.
So, he came in, we sat, and you had to write a synopsis of what you were going to write about.
Listen, I'm not going to talk about the personal life, I'm not going to talk about the social life, I'm not going to talk about the family life of anybody.
I tell the people, the political life of people, in my perspective as I have viewed them, and what I thought of them, honest, open, and candid.
If they don't like it, fine, that's the way it's going to fall, but I'm not going to talk about what Jack Kennedy did, or what Bobby Kennedy did, or anything of that nature, or what Lyndon Johnson, that's not my style.
Except you do offer your views of these people quite candidly.
Well, just let me go along.
We write the paper.
They get 14 houses that want to buy the book.
And at 10 o'clock on a Tuesday morning, you start the auction.
4 o'clock on Tuesday night, the auction is completed.
The Random House is the publisher.
And Billy and I sat down, and I dictated about 200 hours to Billy.
Where'd you get him?
Oh, great.
Thank you.
I dictated about 200 hours.
We did about 100 hours of research.
And Billy had one of those operations.
Word processor.
And I'm being taped all the time.
And Bill would say, you know, I never did see Curly.
Tell me, what about Curly?
Was he the guy that people say is?
I learned the last hurrah.
I loved him.
And I'd tell him stories about Curly, you know.
And he'd be typing everything down.
We would have put a chapter in there with Curly that we never had intended to ever put the chapter in.
I'm signing books today, and who came in?
Old George Larry, who I mentioned in the book about Curly.
I said, George, how old are you?
He said, I'm 84 years old.
And anyway, who came in today but John Cannon.
I mentioned Jimmy Burke and I, Cannon used to be in charge of patronage.
You had to get a letter signed by the patronage chief.
We would double space our letters.
and our name during the height of depression, double spacing.
And I said, we'd fill it in.
And John Cannon would sign it, then we'd fill it in, and we'd get 75 jobs instead of 25 jobs.
And Cannon is in there to see me today.
And he says, Tip, I'm living in Florida, and I happen to be up here visiting my grandchildren.
They said, they were so thrilled that I'm in your book.
I said, Johnny, you educated more people than any one single man in Massachusetts.
He says, Tip, I'm living down in Lauderdale.
I have people come up to me, grown men.
Say, you sent me to college, Johnny.
He was the head of patronage under Curley and then under the Democratic Party along the line.
You mentioned a few Worcester people in there, Jeff Sullivan.
Jeff, yeah.
Jeff's an old pal of mine.
Jeff was Lieutenant Governor, of course.
Billy Askins, as you mentioned.
Billy Askins.
You see the story that I call about Billy Askins.
That's an amazing thing coming through the line yesterday at the Harvard Group.
A woman or a fellow, I forget which it was, he said to me, I'm a cousin of Billy Askins and I see his name in the book.
But that was the story of Billy Askin's boy.
You know, he was hired by the North Avenue Savings Bank to be the executive vice president.
He had thrown up a job.
When they found out he was a Catholic, they wouldn't hire him.
And I'm talking about 1949.
That stuff wasn't supposed to happen.
Well, people say, you know, listen, I talk on
In my lifetime, I'm on a television show this morning, and I'm talking about the newer races.
What do you mean by the newer races?
When I was a kid, you called a French Canadian, you called a Greek American, you called the Italian American, they were the newer races.
There wasn't such a word as ethnic around in those days.
How about the candor, though?
I think this is what impresses me so much.
I started to tell you about Bill.
Bill wrote the first six chapters, and I read the first six chapters where he'd gone over and all the statements.
Bill, that's not me.
That's not me, that's not Tip O'Neill.
I said, gee, you know, I said, you're lacking so in depth in political life and politics and government.
I said, you haven't got me.
Are you going to come down to Washington?
So he came down to Washington, and I had him go to the caucus meetings, and I had him go to the policy committee meetings, and I had him go to the whip organization meetings, and I took him around.
And then he got the flavor of the type of a person I was, and I thought he hit me to the T.
You don't pull any punches.
There's no malice.
I think there are two things.
It is very candid, but it's also not malicious.
I don't want to be malicious.
When you talk about Bobby Kennedy, you didn't like each other.
No, listen.
How many people liked me and didn't like my brother Bill?
Or how many people that I liked but I didn't like so many members of the family?
You know, the interesting fact, I go around the country and people think because I took Jack Kennedy's place in the Congress that I was a close advisor to the president and I get along with the family.
I was frozen out, I tell it in the book.
Jack never wanted me frozen out.
We were good personal friends.
But I always thought it was the Kenny O'Donnell, a Worcester boy, who was Bobby's pal.
They froze me out of the White House, and so I can't go into my life saying, hey, what do you want me to do, tell lies?
I was an advisor, I was there for this and I was there for that.
I wasn't there for those things, and I think I explained it in the book.
Well, even that little anecdote, and it's just about one or two paragraphs, where you mention when Mrs. Kennedy
filed a absentee ballot.
That's a funny story.
There's only one in the district.
And that's the little church down here in the West End, right on Cambridge Street.
And I'm talking to Bob O'Hare the other day.
Bob says, you're wrong on that.
I said, Bob, don't tell me that I was wrong on that.
He said, I drove the Kennedys that morning, he said, with Bill Maury to vote.
And I said, I know you did.
And you called me up and told me they were over there.
But I said, when I get down there, they had left.
And she didn't vote because her absentee vote.
She was eight months pregnant, and they wanted to make sure that in case anything happened, she was in the hospital, she could vote for her husband.
And she voted for Jack Kennedy for president and Eddie McLaughlin for lieutenant governor.
And she didn't vote for Joe Watt for governor, and she didn't vote for Tip O'Neill for or any of the other Democrats on the ticket.
And I said, I felt hurt.
Because I had just come back from giving three weeks of my life to the Kennedys as an advance man.
You must still feel hurt because I think it probably wouldn't have gotten in the book.
But again, the decision to put something like that in the book, I guess it's call them the way they lay.
I call them the way they lay, sure.
Jackie's been nothing but nice to me every time I see her.
She's all tipped and always give me a big hug and a squeeze and a kiss.
Which is an old man from Pretty Girl, makes you feel pretty good.
But the truth of the matter is, she didn't vote for me.
Can you explain why the Speaker of the House for the past fifty years has been from Massachusetts to Texas?
Gee, you know a fellow gave me a paper today, it's here somewhere.
He said, I just wrote a thesis, he says, on Massachusetts politics.
And he says, do you realize, he said, you were ten years, McCormick was nine years, Martin was four years, and he said Sam Raven was sixteen years.
And if you go back far enough, Gillette in the 20s, he said on the speakership and how it reigns between those two.
Well, a very interesting thing.
When I was elected majority leader, John McCormick called me on the telephone.
And he said, I want you to speak to Kyle Albert.
And I want him to appoint Jim Wright as deputy whip.
He said, Tom, you're going to be speaker, and he'll move along.
And he said, we have to have the axis between Austin and Boston.
He says, there was Johnson and Kennedy, there was O'Neill, there was McComick and Raven, and he said, there'll be an O'Neill and a Rice.
And he said, I want you to keep that going.
He said, we can work as a team.
He said, our different philosophies, it gives the blend.
He says, what the national scope and the national feeling of America is, the liberalism of Massachusetts, the moderatism of Texas, he says, together, he says, we make a great leadership team.
And do you subscribe to that?
Yeah, I really believe it.
And as a matter of fact, I thought that Brian Donnelly was going to be the whip, but he went to Detroit instead.
Are you sad that you were never governor?
You mentioned that.
No, you know.
My ambition as a young staffer again at the politics, and I've been the first Speaker of the House, Democratic Speaker, was to be the governor.
But I was down in Washington for a while, and I got political fever.
And of course, I say there are an old friend, Sister Agatha, who was such a dear person.
She said, your life is in Washington where you can do good.
You get too magnanimous a heart.
You have the ability to say no to people.
You'd be a bad governor.
Millie said,
There goes my chances of being First Lady.
The decision for, I'm just curious, she never lived in Washington all these years?
No, she never lived there for 25 years.
When I became Speaker, there's nobody left at the home.
We had a 14-room house in Cambridge, which we sold last year at the end of the service.
And we lived in Washington, and we lived in our home, and Cambridge was awfully expensive to keep up whenever all the children are gone.
As a matter of fact, my son, Michael, and his daughter, and his wife, they babysat him alone.
I think it pretty much says that you're a Massachusetts guy.
None of this baloney about living in Washington.
Listen, I want you to know something.
I'm in Cleveland on Tuesday.
I don't get through in Cleveland until about nine o'clock, and I grab a plane and come back to Boston.
I'd rather be in Boston alone than in some other area with forty people around me.
This is my roots.
This is my life.
If I'm only in Boston, I can get a night's sleep, whether I'm sleeping in my own house or a hotel.
It's big in the environment of home.
Have you had any feedback on the candor of the book?
Has anyone said, gee, maybe you shouldn't have told that story about Mrs. Kennedy not voting for you?
You know, you're the first one that's mentioned there.
Not another soul has met.
Oh, well, I'll mention a prominent reporter of the Boston Globe.
You're too easy on the Kennedys.
You should have been.
Hey, listen.
You know, what do you mean, too easy?
Well, you knew Jack.
Don't talk to me like that.
I don't know about the first life of anybody.
And then I've had people, a couple of people coming through, signing, and saying, I think you've been a little rough on the president.
But on a basis of five to one, they say, you know, Tip, you should have given it to the president with both hands instead of one.
So, you know, satisfied people out there.
But I was the only man in America for ten years that had a daily press conference every day, the house was in session.
Meet with the television, radio in the morning.
Then the cop asked eleven, quarter, twelve, meet with the media, you know, the news people.
Covered all the newspapers.
I had to draw a hundred and a hundred and fifty.
And I'd once in a while have an open
have a statement that I'd read, and then I would articulate and dialogue with them, conversations.
I used to pack them in every day, and I'd get along with all of them, because I was honest and candid.
I never missed any of this.
You know, let me tell you something.
Sam Raven once said, tell the truth.
And he says, tell it as you know it and tell it as you see it.
And he says, the next time it comes around, he says, you're going to tell the same story.
He says, don't lie along the line.
Wasn't it also Rayburn who said, if you want to get along, go along?
Rayburn said, get along.
If you want to get along, go along.
But one of the things that he really did say that was a tremendous factor in my life, I never had a press secretary until I became Speaker of the House.
I never had, I never sent out a news release in my life until I became Speaker of the House and
That's a different thing.
I never looked for credit for anything.
I saw stories of people taking credit for this one coming in.
I was always a back room operator, knowing how to get things done, knowing how to win amendments and knowing how to put things in legislation behind the scenes.
I know how to put things in the budget and things like that.
And I was telling a story in one of the presses this morning.
Eddie Bowen came back from down in North Carolina, the Hatteras National Park.
What a beautiful national park.
I had just come back from Falmouth.
The Cape was going honky-tonk.
Together we put a bill together for the Cape Cod National Park.
Saltonstall opposed it.
Kennedy opposed it.
It eventually goes through as the Saltonstall-Kennedy Park.
Eddie and I did all the work on that.
I think that I looked back and I said, gee...
700 and some odd miles of coastline, only 29 miles of open beach for the people, and we build a beach 55 miles long.
Sam Rapin says, when you're interested in something and you're able to accomplish it, there's a satisfaction from within.
If somebody else gets their headline, don't let it bother you.
And I went through all things of that nature.
Well, what do you think a lot of these purported good government people would say, if you want to get along, go along to that?
I mean, politics is politics.
Well, politics has changed.
The ethics of politics has changed.
You couldn't do the things that I say in the book that Sam Rabin used to do today.
Hell, I wouldn't call the intent of revenue for my mother or myself, let alone some member of the Congress.
So politics has changed.
The style has changed.
I'm the last, I guess, of the lunch pocket.
Did you like it better the old way?
Well, you know, people say, how did you ever move?
There's an old story, an old statement, I've used it many times.
You know, you're the old Curly Vintage, you're the old Paul Dever Vintage, you're the old Roosevelt type of a Democrat, you're the old Bretton Butter Liberal, working wages liberal, dinner pay liberal.
You'll fight for the family and increase it.
The half at home, keep it burning, more education and things like that.
The new group came along.
You know, the environmental, the Save the Whales group, things of that nature.
The truth of the matter is that the style of politics changed.
And I kept one foot in one bucket and one foot in the other bucket.
And an old dog can learn new tricks if he wants to learn new tricks.
So as they came along, I stayed atop of all of the new things, but never forgetting from where I came and never forgetting the basics of which I believed in.
What do you personally consider your greatest accomplishment?
That's hard to start, just to say.
I know what historians tell me and people that have followed me up now.
There was a turn in my life when I opposed as the
As a loyal Democrat of the establishment, I opposed Johnson in the war, and that I was a key factor in the Congress in turning the Congress around with regards to that war.
One of my great falsehoods, when Johnson said to me, you've got a following in the House that I hope you won't go to the questionnaires, and I didn't for probably a period of the year, which I'd say in my lifetime, I did the wrong thing.
But then I came out openly against the war in 1967.
And I was a real continent.
I think I did the right thing.
I think it was an accomplishment.
So you say it's difficult to say what gives you the greatest satisfaction, but that would rank up.
When they tell me two million people who go to Cape Cod for the summer and for the beach, this campus down there and all that, I get a kick out of it.
The Minuteman National Park, I know I played a part of it.
When I look at the development of Boston here, I know in the last ten years the Speaker of the House, if I could call a chairman, it would be then.
But I know that I played a part in the enhancement of the economy last year, and I'm proud of it.
You make that point in the book, too.
Now, you're the Speaker of the House, very close to the number one job, yet you always remember the district.
Well, all politics are local.
Once you forget where you came from, you're going to get a rude awakening, and that's why they're surprised along the line.
I put so much in the budget from the U.S.
I'm one of the great spenders of all time, they say.
How do you react to that?
One day, I put $160 million in the federal budget for cancer, for the study of cancer.
And in one day, I increased the budget behind the scenes in the committee, $45 million for a study on women's breast cancer.
I can multiply that.
I put $50 million in another day for turned-in ankles and knocked knees.
Seven out of every ten children that used to be born either had turned-in ankles and knocked knees.
Now, who's going to make a study on that?
Who's going to say you correct your diet?
Who's going to say that you put braces in there?
Nobody's going to make a study on that unless Uncle Sam
has a project out there and is paying young interns to be specialists in that field.
And I put seventy-odd million dollars in.
You know, the interesting thing, one of my own grandchildren were born with turned in ankles and turned in toes.
Within a matter of three months after she was born, she was cured.
She was cured.
And I don't know, I'm going to put forty million in or something like that for the study of dwarfs.
It's unbelievable.
The average dwarf grew the age of 26 inches.
Who's going to study dwarfs?
8,000 of them are born in America a year.
There are only about 160,000 of them in the country.
And yet we now have a process.
When they find that a child is a dwarf before it's a year and a half, by certain vitamins, by cutting certain tendons, by stretch bodies, they can now grow a dwarf if they find that he's a dwarf before the year and a half.
They can bring them up to 48 or 50 inches.
And these are all people programs.
These are all people programs.
Nobody ever got any headlines on that one.
The Wall Street Journal knocked my brains out because I had put the money in them for that budget.
They said we'd be better off buying Cuban hills for them.
But, you know, we don't do enough in the field of research.
People say, are there any problems that you wish they had moved on before you left?
My next question is a matter of fact.
Well, there's so many of them up.
Well, let me tell you one.
There are 2,200,000 people over the age of 85 in America right there.
By the year 2000, there's going to be 6 million Americans over the age of 85.
92% of them have only one income, Social Security.
That's a problem.
They can't get by on Social Security.
We're living older all the time.
That's an obligation of the federal government, and we've got to prepare and get ready for it.
But there's lots of things of that nature out there.
I was talking to the group of young fellows that I meet with all members of Congress, and I said, you know, this is a serious problem.
It's about time the old age committee started to look at that.
Well, we are looking at it.
Well, it's going to be down the road quicker than you think.
I had a study on water.
We thought energy was a crisis 25, 30 years from now.
Water is going to be a crisis.
Down in the Cape, too.
Sure.
It's going to be all around America.
And I said, you know, Carter was wrong when he said, you know, pork barrel.
America needs these dams all over the country because there's going to be a water shortage.
I'm just going to turn this on the other side, sir.